# Richard Interview Blog Post:
2016-01-04

### Intro

Rik is that kid in school that never listened to the rules and always got into trouble. He is that person your parents would never let you hang out with not because he's dangerous, but because he's principled. Rik cares deeply about people and is remarkably scientific in his approaches to solving problems and making the world a better place. Rik is, among many things, a biologist, hacker, and PhD student and if you've ever seen any of his work you already know he's intelligent, thoughtful, and talented. He lives in Essex, UK with his dog, 3 cats, fiancé and son, just 20 miles from Cambridge where he is studying how to make crops more productive for the poorest people in the world. Rik could be making millions of dollars in silicon valley, but instead he's interested in making science more accessible and diverse and just more enjoyable to do. 

This interview is a collection of exerpts from an interview I conducted with Rik when we both started our Mozilla Science Fellowship. 

***

**Joey:** It sounds like you found many different interests and talents and duct taped them together in a way that’s interesting and coherent. Can you explain how you got to where you are?

**Rik:** "there was never any plan. As a child I was good at stuff at school, but I strongly resented adults who told me that I had to follow rules but wouldn't explain why the rules were the way that they were. I was very naughty at school"

"My school years were just irrelevant to my education, which occurred almost entirely outside school... as a teenager, I was very, very interested in computers. [Though] honestly I felt at the time that I could learn computer science in my spare time without going to university and not bother with that whole stress of having to apply to universities. So I didn't go."

"Eventually I ended up going to South Africa where I was offered to go for several months and work as a wildlife photographer and just document a game reserve before it was open to the public. I was in the right place at the right time. Or at least I had a friend whose dad's charity had a lot of money, and got to go to South Africa, take pictures of animals, but mainly just have a really cool time following around this conservation biologist. He would kind of race around just this wilderness with radio tracking equipment and a gun and be looking for rhino and elephant and other animals. To me that was just sort of the most romantic idea of what you could possibly do with your life. I just thought if I can do this for the rest of my life, I’ll be happy. That's how I felt at the age of about 21."

"And so I decided to come back to the UK and study conservation biology, which I did. I went to University of Western England and did a conservation biology BSc. And whilst I was doing that, I actually discovered that I'm really an academic, which I hadn't really realized before. I love thinking and learning and organizing my knowledge and all these things that academics do. So I was there (at university) as a sort of early 20's person who'd suddenly discovered a love for knowledge. Every summer and holiday, I was doing research projects with different lecturers and researchers there. And they were all very supportive and generous. I think they were just pleased to have someone who was really interested and not just trying to party. I [also] worked either full or part time the entire time through university to support myself... I did software development, some ecological surveying, and a year in industry working at the Millennium Seed Bank."


**Joey:** So despite all of your highly employable skills, how did you choose Cambridge? and why a PhD?

**Rik:** "I'm a very strategic person. I thought very carefully about the balance of what my interests were. Fundamentally, I wanted to do a PhD because I wanted to be a scientist. I wanted to save the world. I wanted to make the world a better place. And I thought, well, I have certain skills, and I'm going to get better at some things during my PhD. What I should try and do is find a lab whose work could potentially change the world, but where they're probably held back by the lack of the kind of skills that I have. So I did this several months long analysis where I would read articles in the scientific literature and the press about just projects that were expected to have a huge impact on the world. What kind of aspects of agriculture, for example, were we expecting to struggle with in the future, and what research projects were tackling those. And I narrowed it down to three or four research topics that I was interested in, and then I did some more kind of analysis of the literature to figure out 'who did I think were the key players in those fields', 'who were most likely to be able to make those breakthroughs?' I was looking for people who had lots of resources. So they were not going to be short of money, but what they were lacking was some kind of expertise that I thought I might be able to provide. And I narrowed it down basically to the C4 Rice project and a couple of other crop engineering projects, because they were doing a lot of plant physiology stuff, measuring plants on a large scale, and none of them seem to have any programmers. And I was like, well, they're going to have huge amounts of data. Surely like my kind of vague skill (programming and hacking) set will come in handy. And then, I emailed. The only one who gave me a polite reply was my current supervisor, so I chose C4."

**Joey:** You're quite active and vocal in the open science community. Can you explain why open science is important to you?

**Rik:** "I came into science, first of all, through just wanting to be kind of a romantic cowboy in Africa. And once I'd scrapped that idea, I realized that some of the things that we were applying science to could really make people's lives better on a vast scale, or could make humanity more sustainable or less likely to destroy itself in the immediate future. I'm not so sure that science could really save humanity from any sort of apocalyptic disaster [laughs] but it could make people's lives much better in the really quite immediate future. Even on the time scale of small numbers of years, five years, applying a scientific breakthrough in agriculture can literally alleviate starvation or malnutrition on a massive scale and make a difference in children dying and/or growing up with serious life-destroying diseases..." 

"However throughout my PhD, I became more and more aware, to the point where it dominated my worldview, that actually science is really quite badly broken in various ways. Systematically broken. And is being exploited on a massive scale to the detriment of humanity, society, and science itself. I began thinking about how can we design science to perform the role that society believes it's getting in return for its massive, absolutely vast historical and current investment in science. Because if we as scientists say science needs to be funded more, then we can't do that in good conscience if we then throw wads of money at companies who are producing pathetically valueless products like publishers or people who make scientific machinery who have just insane markups for things which are actually trivial to do. The way that they've managed to  milk science so systematically is by getting in early before it was trivially easy to do those things and monopolize all these different streams of money that are going into science. It's been very difficult for anyone to break through those monopolies."

"I believe it is our responsibility as scientists, as people who are paid to do what we want to do,and as people who want the intellectual freedom to study the world and have fun pointing out new to make sure that that money is being spent effectively. It doesn't have to be spent on us, but it does have to be spent in such a way that the public can get some kind of value back for their money. I think at the moment we are failing completely to do that."

"What these science monopolies are are the most important node in a huge network of problems in science that affects things like the incentives, which change the way that scientists act. It affects science culture because we're so controlled by publishers and the people who take money from us, and by the people who give money to us, grant-awarding bodies and the people who sit on their committees that the way that scientists behave is almost completely predetermined by the rules of that system, which are all shit."

"So my career from now until it's getting to a satisfactory level, has to be primarily about making science work right because I would love to be a good scientist. But I can't in good conscience focus on being a scientist when we're wasting everybody's money and doing much worse science than we could otherwise be doing. So yes, we need to fix things. "


**Joey**: I know you're a big fan of hip-hop. Can you talk about how you see how hip-hop and open science are related?

**Rik:** "hip-hop has multiple elements, like rapping, MCing, and DJing. DJing is about exploring the history of your own culture and selecting things that have been expressed in a way that you think captures something that you want to say, and then combining those things that you've extracted from the history of your culture together to create a new expression. So DJing is about combining bits of music together that already exist to create a new bit of music, but it has a very, very rich culture and a very rich history, which is really about respecting what people have done before you, respecting the creativity and intelligence of people who have come before you, taking what they've done that you think is amazing and using it to create something that is incrementally getting more and more amazing as time goes by. "

"Respecting the history of your culture is a huge thing in hip-hop. It's extremely similar to science where citation, showing the origin of your ideas, and the facts and ideas that you've used to reach your conclusion, that is exactly what's happening in a hip-hop song when a DJ mixes together samples"

"It's a way of saluting people who come before. So something that is true in hip-hop, which is not true in science, is that really anyone can be involved in hip-hop. Science does not have that. Science has a very strong exclusivity about it. Science thinks it's more important than it is, and the people in it think they're more important than they are."

"But fundamentally, it doesn't matter how cool you are. It doesn't matter what color you are. It doesn't matter what education you've got. Hip-hop is just a way of telling people about anything that you want to say, and it brings with it a very rich cultural history that involves respecting what's come before. Science has the rich cultural history of what's come before. What it doesn't have is that anyone can get into it regardless of their economic status, education, race, color, all of these things. We have a severe access problem in science and I actually think that hip-hop is quite a nice route into solving that problem."

"hip-hop has a lot of connections to programming as well. Programming has a history of citation, of respecting what's come before by reusing code that other people have written. But more interestingly, hip-hop is algorithmic. So hip-hop is about 'I create something small and clever, and I repeat it in a certain way', which is fundamentally how programming works."


**Joey:** Being a hacker and a scientist is an interesting combination. How does the ethos of hacking influence your research?

**Rik:** hacking has a lot of the cultural similarities with modern science in the way that it's broken. hacking values knowledge, especially knowledge that has never been previously discovered. You have to do something fundamentally clever that astound people around you by how clever it is, you have to think of things that nobody's thought of before, or at least things that nobody's expecting. That's really what we have to do in science as well. We have to take a huge amount of information in, which if you don't already know, to be able to come up with a new way to break into a computer system that's been used by millions of people and tested and secured by millions of people, that can take an incredible amount of ingenuity and research. And the skills are really quite mappable between science and hacking. But the rewards are quite different, I would say."

"The big difference between scientists and hackers is that In science, there is a pool of funding. People have lives and they have to...they have to support their families and themselves. At the end of the day, they will compromise for the incentives. They will compromise so that they can have a roof to sleep under. Hacking tends to be done by people who don't need to make that kind of compromise, for whatever reason. Hackers are generally people who are not motivated by money; they're motivated by discovery, intellectual curiosity, and often hatred of authority."


**Joey:** What would you be doing if you weren't studying plants and advocating for open science?

**Rik**: "I think authority is just about the worst thing ever. A lot of my behavior gets driven by this kind of very deep reactionary flipping out that happens when people of authority try to impose their values and systems onto me or others, especially when those values and systems are flawed. What happens too often is that some person in charge sets some rules that restricts us from doing the one thing that would benefit society. That really riels me up and it also gets my creative juices flowing and tends to make me find ways to get around the system."

"In all honesty, I think I would be some kind of criminal. I'd probably be in jail."
